# Measurements: JBL LSR 305 vs KRK Rokit RPG5 G2

[<img src="https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-6-ZlDPocwYo/WJ6PwZEOZYI/AAAAAAAALNc/iWwgS1DmUGMLWd3ivTALpd68MgEvtiPcgCLcB/s200/jbl.jpg" width="133" height="200" />](https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-6-ZlDPocwYo/WJ6PwZEOZYI/AAAAAAAALNc/iWwgS1DmUGMLWd3ivTALpd68MgEvtiPcgCLcB/s1600/jbl.jpg)

Last week, thanks to a [Massdrop
offer](https://www.massdrop.com/buy/jbl-lsr305), I've got a pair of [JBL
LSR
305](http://www.jblpro.com/www/products/recording-broadcast/3-series/lsr305)
powered monitors just for **$99** per unit. I've bought them with an
intention to add to my current 2.1 setup consisting of [KRK Rokit RPG5
G2](http://www.krksys.com/manuals/rokit/rokit_manual%20REV%20E%20-%20web.pdf)
monitors and [KRK 10s](http://www.krksys.com/krk-subwoofers/10s.html)
sub, plus [Cambridge Audio
GO](https://www.cambridgeaudio.com/products/wireless-speakers/go)
portable speaker for the center channel.

So now I've got two pairs of monitors, and needed to choose which ones
put to front and which ones to back. I decided to make some measurements
in order to support my decision, and I think, since these are really
cheap speakers, the results may be interesting to a wide group of
people.

[<img src="https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-ICv8Y8I53V4/WJ6OhSavugI/AAAAAAAALNQ/N7dkuWI-0BceVRCylFKoexevWUL3hM0qgCLcB/s200/nti.jpg" width="185" height="200" />](https://2.bp.blogspot.com/-ICv8Y8I53V4/WJ6OhSavugI/AAAAAAAALNQ/N7dkuWI-0BceVRCylFKoexevWUL3hM0qgCLcB/s1600/nti.jpg)

I could only perform the measurements at my apartment, and it has
absolutely no acoustic treatment, thus the speakers obviously would not
behave as in an anechoic chamber or in free field. So in order to have
some reference, I borrowed [NTi
TalkBox](http://www.nti-audio.com/products/talkbox.aspx)—an amazing
reference speaker with absolutely flat response in the range from **100 Hz**
to **10 kHz**.

[<img src="https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-FTePlCmTBz4/WJ6QkVzH5aI/AAAAAAAALNk/3sHP1MSxIdUxS7j_TyjjrB9CMonzJJSggCLcB/s200/krk.jpg" width="131" height="200" />](https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-FTePlCmTBz4/WJ6QkVzH5aI/AAAAAAAALNk/3sHP1MSxIdUxS7j_TyjjrB9CMonzJJSggCLcB/s1600/krk.jpg)

The two characteristics of the speakers that were of great interest for
me were: frequency response and... frequency response again, but with
measurements taken from different angles in a horizontal plane. The
reason is that I usually watch movies with family, and everyone on our
couch should have a change to be in a "sweet spot". So for front
speakers I would choose those that exhibit more even response on angles,
while for rear speakers it doesn't matter as much since they are
positioned much closer to the listeners, and hence more directional.

## On-axis Frequency Response

Below are 1/3 octave averaged frequency responses of JBL, KRK, and NTi
speakers taken at the same location, from **1 meter**, on axis, with all
tone controls on JBL and KRK speakers being set to neutral positions:

[![](https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-4ZKCbo3kNk4/WJ6JRvfwZaI/AAAAAAAALMs/uAFzsnT0hFIe7LOuwL-L_HWVPf5cqcu_gCLcB/s1600/amp-resp-on-axis.png)](https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-4ZKCbo3kNk4/WJ6JRvfwZaI/AAAAAAAALMs/uAFzsnT0hFIe7LOuwL-L_HWVPf5cqcu_gCLcB/s1600/amp-resp-on-axis.png)

Obviously, the wiggles in the range from **100 Hz** to **1 kHz** are due
to room modes—they are almost the same for all 3 speakers.

Some interesting conclusions I've got from this graph:

1.  Room modes alone can cause **\> 6 dB** swings in the frequency
    response of a speaker that is flat in anechoic conditions (NTi).
    That means, if you don't invest in acoustic treatment of your room,
    there is absolutely no point in buying any expensive speakers.
2.  KRK speaker has a "better" bass response than JBL's, but I think
    it's largely achieved by using a big reflective port—the bass heard
    from KRK is indeed a bit artificial.
3.  JBL speaker has more or less "flat" response at high frequencies,
    but it has this interesting "bright spot" at **1.5 kHz**, which
    actually makes their sound brighter than of KRK's, despite that the
    latter have built-in "treble boost" after **4 kHz**.

It still remains a mystery to me why NTi graph has this bump centered at
about **9.5 kHz**, my current theory is that maybe it is revealing the
imperfections of the measurement microphone ([miniDSP
UMIK-1](https://www.minidsp.com/products/acoustic-measurement/umik-1)).
I've tried directing the microphone both straight into the speaker and
downwards (and choosing an appropriate calibration file), but the bump
was still there.

## Horizontal Frequency Response

Having the speakers set at the same position, I began moving the
measurement microphone in a horizontal plane, preserving height and
distance from the speaker. I took measurements at **15°**, **30°**, and
**45°** angles. Here is the response of JBL speaker, 1/3 octave
averaged:

[![](https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-7IIBVH_eJDE/WJ6LY-CxzeI/AAAAAAAALM4/MZx9d5jwSQgKKXXzXVooS2PpFhbFM6-FwCLcB/s1600/amp-resp-dir-jbl.png)](https://3.bp.blogspot.com/-7IIBVH_eJDE/WJ6LY-CxzeI/AAAAAAAALM4/MZx9d5jwSQgKKXXzXVooS2PpFhbFM6-FwCLcB/s1600/amp-resp-dir-jbl.png)

It's actually pretty much consistent up to **10 kHz**, and even after
that the difference between on-axis and **45°** is slightly above **1 dB**.
Again, the deviations in the range from **60 Hz** to **1 kHz** are
largely due to room modes, as the microphone was moving around in the
sound field. The "bright spot" doesn't fade when listening from sides.

Now, here is the response of KRK speaker, 1/3 octave averaged:

[![](https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-YM7jGb--Mb0/WJ6MZF0cFPI/AAAAAAAALNA/g0jT9ZcrW04eUgV_xtcU7WZTbUt79v3QQCLcB/s1600/amp-resp-dir-krk.png)](https://1.bp.blogspot.com/-YM7jGb--Mb0/WJ6MZF0cFPI/AAAAAAAALNA/g0jT9ZcrW04eUgV_xtcU7WZTbUt79v3QQCLcB/s1600/amp-resp-dir-krk.png)

Here, the lines start to diverge earlier—at **5 kHz**, and the delta
between on-axis and **45°** reaches **4 dB** at high frequencies. Thus,
KRK speaker is definitely more directional than JBL's.

## Conclusions

Based on these measurements, I chose to put JBL speakers as fronts.
Their lacking bass response is compensated by a subwoofer, and due to
their brightness they are awesome for enjoying music. While KRK
speakers, thanks to their enhanced bass response and flatness on-axis
are perfect for the rear position, I don't even need to route surround
channels to the subwoofer.
